Lesson One

Goals for this lesson: 

  * Get to know each other!
  * Basic understanding of mushroom lifecycle
  * Decomposers vs Mychorrhizal Fungi
  * Define our focus: home-scale cultivation
  * 5 W's regarding home cultivation
  * Basic understanding of fungal needs and the cultivator's role
  * Safe PC usage
  * Basic understanding of filter jars and why we'll use them

I. Introduction
  A. Who am i?
  B. Who are you?
  C. Goals for this course
    1. Learn primary skills to build on
    2. Hands-on practice
    3. What can I do when this course is done?
      a. understand fungal needs
      b. clone mushroom tissue and grow it out
      c. have the resources and understanding to keep going
  D. Goals for this lesson
    1-8. see above
II. Mushroom Life Cycle
  A. [IMAGE] fungi life cycle - EGCM, pg 18
  B. Description of Basidiomycota life cycle (RMyc, pgs 9-10)
  C. Ecological Roles
    1. "The Role of Fungi as Decomposers" (RMyc, pg 38)
    2. "Benefits of the Mycorrhizal Relationship" (RMyc, pg 29)
III. 5W's of Home Cultivation
  A. Who can cultivate mushrooms at home?
    1. Anyone! 
    2. Invest various amounts of time, money and interest
  B. What is the goal here?  What can I learn?
    1. Home-scale cultivation (but that's still broad!)
    2. How to clone a mushroom (any mushroom - forest or market)
    3. Build up mycelium in a controlled environment
    4. Resources about where to learn more
  C. When can mushrooms be cultivated?
    1. Anytime!
    2. Seasonal changes can be used to focus on different species
  D. Where can mushrooms be cultivated?
    1. (almost) Anywhere!
      a. apartment
      b. office
      c. storage locker
      d. somewhere you will be often
      e. somewhere you can automate
      f. somewhere with basic facilities and stable temperature
  E. Why cultivate mushrooms?
    1. Food
      a. excellent source of protein for vegans (and everyone)
      b. food security - produce food locally
      c. circular economy - produce food from local waste streams
      d. permaculture - mushrooms are extremely multi-functional
    2. Medicine
      a. *Penicillium chyrsogenum*
      b. Anti-Cancer, Anti-AIDS, and more (MR, chapter 4)
      c. "Customized MycoMedicine" (RMyc, 184)
    3. Psychedelics
      a. probably a few here for this anyway...
      b. this is how home-scale cultivation got started
      c. the best horticulturists grow pot, the best mycologists...
    4. Research
      a. natural systems
      b. mycointernet!
    5. Mycorestoration - or "enhanced ecological roles"
      a. oil spills - *Pleurotus* spp
      b. Weapons caches vs *Flammulina velutipes* (Enoki) (MR, pg 99)
      c. Nerve Gas vs *Psilocybe* spp and luminescent mushrooms (MR, pg 98)
    6. Education and projects for kids
    7. Businesses and community projects
V. Fungal Needs and the Cultivator's Role
  A. "The 5 Fungal Needs" (RMyc, pg 203)
    1. Fungi need lots of good water, but not too much
    2. Fungi need a healthy diet
    3. Fungi need to breath
    4. Fungi need warmth
    5. Mushrooms need a proper fruiting surface
  B. Phases of Cultivation (RMyc, pgs 201-202)
    1. Preface: the toolbelt approach
      a. no right way
      b. each method offers new options
      c. find what works for you
      d. it's okay to nerd out and it's okay not to
      e. expect failure and learn from it (journal!)
      f. prioritize results
    2. Phase 1: Agar and Liquid Inoculum
      a. Starting point
        i. when there is tissue to clone or spores to germinate
      b. “The first step toward growing fruit bodies is to obtain a healthy and
      competitor-free culture of mycelium” (RMyc, pg 228)
      c. "Expanding the mass...is the primary goal" (EGCM, pg 18)
      d. Options
        i. spores, live mycelium, dry mushrooms
        ii. agar, liquid inoculum, cardboard
      e. Senescence and keeping it interesting (RMyc, pg 205)
    3. Phase 2: Grain Spawn
      a. Starting point
        i. agar: when surface is 80-90% colonized
        ii. liquid inoculum: when viable mycelium can be extracted (1-2 weeks)
      b. “Grains provide a cheap, nutrient dense substrate for mycelium to
      rapidly grow on” (Radical Mycology)
      c. Preparation
        i. Goldilocks zone (RMyc, pg 247)
        ii. Soak and then sterilize
      d. Options
        i. rye, wheat, millet, popcorn, birdseed
        ii. agar, liquid inoculum
        iii. to shake or not to shake?
    4. Phase 3: Preparing and Inoculating Fruiting Substrate
    5. Phase 4: Fruiting
  C. "Preparing the Landing Zone" - Sanitation
    1. EGCM, pg 44
    2. The cultivator is best when s/he is simply a facilitator
      a. The mycelium knows what to do
      b. Setup the environment as best you can with minimal interference

WORKSHOP:

I. Safe PC Usage
II. Introduction to Agar Jars
  A. What they are - explanation of the pieces
  B. Why we should use them
  C. Alternative to plates
III. [ACTIVITY] Build Agar Jars
