Lesson Four:

Required equipment:

  * Sterilized spawn jars, syringes and water jars
  * Colonized agar jars

Required preperation:

  * PC spawn jars, syringes, needles and water jars

Goals for this this lesson:

  * Review last week's main points
  * Discuss substrate function and options by species
  * Evironmental requirements by species
  * Outline a simple fruiting method
  * Discuss the PF Tek
  * List resources - sites, shops and books
  * Answer any lingering questions
  * Transfer mycelium to spawn jars

I. Introduction
  A. Goals for this lesson
  B. Review
    1. Tissue cloning - walkthrough of the steps
      a. Sterilize equipment
      b. Draw up sterile water
      c. Perform tissue biopsy
    2. What were the biggest challenges of tissue cloning?
    3. Why use grain spawn?
    4. 4 most common grains to use for spawn
      a. rye, millet, bird seed, popcorn
    5. Hydration - what is it and why is it necessary?
      a. softens the grain so the mycelium can penetrate
      b. provides water to the mycelium
      c. wakes up endospores so they can be killed
II. All about Substrate
  A. What is Substrate? (MC IV, pg 19)
    1. The material on which mycelium grows
    2. A substrates properties determine which fungi and microbes can grow in it
    3. The environment also plays a role
      a. Relative humidity
      b. Ventilation / FAE
      c. Light levels
      d. temperature
  B. Substrate Selectivity (MC IV, pp 19-22)
    1. The better the substrate meets the demands of a specific species and the
    less suitable it is for other species, the more *selective* it is.
    2. Some fungi can use a broad range of substrate (Oysters)
    3. Some fungi can use only certain narrowly defined materials (Shiitake)
    4. Selectivity parameters depend primarily on species
    4. Selectivity depends on:
      a. available nutrients
        i. the more accessible nutrients are available, the higher the yield
        ii. the more accessible nutrients are available, the higher the risk of
        contamination
      b. compactness
        i. too loose and the mycelium requires a lot of energy to expand
        ii. too tight and the mycelium can't breath
      c. water content and activity
        i. too much water clogs air flow
        ii. too little water provides...too little water
        iii. the squeeze test - like an old man peeing
          - you should get a few drops from normal pressure
      d. pH level
        i. Neutral is 7, lower is acidic, higher is basic
        ii. most cultivated mushrooms prefer a slightly acidic environment
        iii. low pH can also be an indication of bacterial infection
        iv. chalk and gypsum are the most common ways to stabilize pH
      e. environment - humidity, fresh air, light & temperature
III. Environmental Requirements by Species
  A. General information
    i. Search by the Latin name <Species genus> (Mushroms Demystified)
    ii. The Shroomery has good info for most common species
    iii. Most species benefit from a cold shock to begin fruiting
  B. Flammulina velutipes (Enoki)
    i. spawn run 22-26
    ii. fruiting 3-15
    iii. sterilized hardwood/paper
  C. Hericium erinaceus (Lion's Mane)
    i. spawn run 25
    ii. fruiting 15-25/20-28 (depends on strain)
    iii. sterilized supplemented sawdust
    iv. stimulates nerve growth and is being researched for treating
    degenerative mental diseases and nerve damage
  D. Hypsizygus tessulatus (Shimeji)
    i. spawn run 21-24
    ii. fruiting 13-18
    iii. sterilized suplimented sawdust
  E. Lentinula edodes (Shiitake)
    i. spawn run 20-30
    ii. fruiting 8-24 (depends on strain)
    iii. sterilized supplemented sawdust + wood chips (depends on strain)
    iv. when grown under normal conditions and dried in the sun with gills
    facing up, shiitakes can produce up to 46,000 IU of Vitamin per 100 grams.
    The FDA recommends ~400 grams/day (Mycelium Running, pg 206)
  F. Pleurotus eryngii (King Oyster)
    i. spawn run 20-25
    ii. fruiting 15-22
    iii. hardwood sawdust and/or supplemented wheat straw
    iv. If you cut the stem in thick wheels and pan fry them with butter and
    white wine, they taste remarkably similar to sea scallops
  G. Pleurotus ostreatus (Oyster)
    i. spawn run 20-25
    ii. fruiting 5-25
    iii. like, everything. straw, paper, coffee, sawdust, wood chips, soybean
    waste, agave waste, palm-oil by-products, etc
  H. Psilocybe cubensis (the 'magic' mushroom)
    i. spawn run 27-30
    ii. fruiting 22-24
    iii. pastuerized cow or horse manure, coconut coir, straw, etc
    iv. Terence McKenna.
IV. Fruiting
  A. Caveat
    i. this is very, very basic - research online!
  B. Materials
    i. clean plastic bags
    ii. pasteurized substrate (coffee, straw, etc - depends on the species)
    iii. clean spawn
    iv. rubberband
    v. a large bowl or container for mixing
    vi. rubbing alcohol (70%)
    vii. optionally, polyfil and toilet paper tube
  C. Process
    i. wash your hands and wipe them with alcohol
    ii. wash the bowl and wipe it with alcohol
    iii. combine the substrate and spawn and mix together (consider ratio)
    iv. load into bags with a toilet paper tube at the top
    v. wrap a rubberband around the toilet paper tube and stuff with polyfil
    vi. when the bag is fully colonized, make some openings (top or sides)
    vii. consider building a shotgun fruiting chamber - humidity and fae
V. PF Tek
  A. What is it?
    i. created in 1992 by Psylocybe Fanaticus
    ii. the 'classic' low-tech way to grow magic mushrooms
    iii. it works for many/most mushroom species
  B. Why use this tek?
    i. Fast, easy and nearly fool-proof
    ii. Good for getting the feel of the cultivation cycle as a beginner
    iii. Great for making small batches and/or for experimentation
  C. The Technique
    i. see the resources section for the full tutorial
    ii. prepare the substrate (vermiculite, brown rice flour and water)
    iii. fill small, straight-walled jars with the substrate and PC
    iv. inoculate the substrate with mycelium or a spore syringe
    v. after full colonization, 'birth' the jars into a fruiting chamber
    vi. mist and fan as necessary and wait for fruits
VI. Resources
  A. Sites
    i. www.shroomery.org
      - www.shroomery.org/13864/General-Cultivation-updated-2017
      - www.shroomery.org/forums/
    ii. www.reddit.com/r/mushroomgrowers
    iii. www.reddit.com/r/mycology
    iv. www.fungifun.org/English/Pftek
  B. Materials
    i. www.pilzzuchtshop.eu/pilzzuchtbedarf/
    ii. www.flaschenbauer.de
  C. Books
    i. *Essential Guide to Cultivating Mushrooms* - Stephen Russel
    ii. *Radical Mycology* - Peter McCoy
    iii. *Mycelium Running* - Paul Stamets
    iv. *Growing Gourmet and Medicinal Mushrooms* - Paul Stamets
    v. *Mushrooms Demystified* - David Arora


WORKSHOP:

I. Transfer mycelium from agar jars to spawn jars (if ready)
