Lesson Two

Required equipment:

  * Materials to make Agar + solid recipe
  * Hot plate/Heat source
  * Drill(s)
  * Example Spawn Jars
  * Example fungal contamination
  * Example bacterial contamination

Goals for this this lesson:

  * Review last week's main points
  * The basics of working with agar
  * Understand nutritional requirements of mycelium
  * A deeper look at 'Phase 1' of cultivation
  * Contamination and Santitation
  * Unknown unknowns - gloveboxes, agar plates, etc...
  * How to prepare and pour agar

I. Introduction
  A. Goals for this lesson
    1-7. see above
  B. Review
    1. Mushroom Life Cycle
    2. Fungal Needs
    3. Safe PC Usage
    4. Filter Jars
II. Agar
  A. What is Agar?
    1. Summary (RMyc, pg 229)
  B. Working with Agar: The Basics
    1. Why use Agar? (RMyc, pg 229)
      a. Cleanup mushroom tissue
      b. Isolate and develop individual mycelium strains
      c. Facilitate the responses of mycelium to various other entities
    2. Media Formulation
      a. components
        i. Carbon - dextrose, malt extract, potato water
        ii. Proteins - cereal flour, peptone
        iii. B Vitamins - yeast
        iv. Minerals - gypsum
        v. A taste of what's to come - 3-5% to stiumulate digestive enzymes
      b. restricted ingrediants
        i. coconut, garlic, pomegranate, cinnamon, cloves, curry, cilantro
      c. the importance of a rotating menu
    3. Preparing and Sterilizing Agar
      a. pick a recipe
      b. heat slowly just to the point of incorporation
      c. be careful not to caramelize sugars - this is toxic to some fungi
      a. sterilize @15psi for 30 minutes
    4. Dealing with contamination (RMyc, pg 240)
      a. agar facilitates growth - that's the point
      b. contamination isn't a failure, it's part of the process
      c. more on this later...
  C. Nutritional requirements of mycelium (RMyc, pg 216-217)
    1. Macronutrients
      a. Carbon (C)
        i. the 'energy source' for living organisms
        ii. required for cellular energy and to build cellular structures
        iii. decomposer fungi obtain much of their carbon from digesting plant matter
      b. Nitrogen (N)
        i. the backbone of enzyme (chemical catalyst) production
        ii. the amount of available Nitrogen is a major limiting factor in cultivation
        iii. more nitrogen is often added in the form of manure or wheat bran
        iv. 1-2% of Nitrogen is about right for a substrate
        v. fruiting requires more nitrogen than the mycelium's vegetative state
      c. Oxygen (O)
        i. mushrooms use Oxygen in numerous cellular processes
    2. Micronutrients
      a. Phosphorus (K)
        i. used in the production of ATP, nucleic acids and cell membranes
      b. Sulfer (S)
        i. used to make amino acids
        ii. can provided in the form of vitamins B1 or B7
      c. Potassium (P)
        i. critical to fungal metabolism
        ii. influences the osmotic potential of hyphae (makes them more sneaky)
      d. Magnesium (Mg)
        i. influences the energy storage of ATP
      e. Calcium (Ca)
        i. regulate cell functions
        ii. transport sugars and proteins across cell walls
  D. A Deeper Look at Phase One
    1. Starting point
      a. when there is tissue to clone or spores to germinate
    2. “The first step toward growing fruit bodies is to obtain a healthy and
    competitor-free culture of mycelium” (RMyc, pg 228)
    3. "Expanding the mass...is the primary goal" (EGCM, pg 18)
    4. Options
      b. spores, live mycelium, dry mushrooms
      c. agar, liquid inoculum, cardboard
III. Contamination
  A. The 8 Causes of Contamination (RMyc, pgs 208-209)
    1. The Cultivator
    2. The Air
    3. The Environment
    4. The Substrate
    5. The Inoculum
    6. The Tools
    7. Pests
    8. Technique (the disciple of do easy)
  B. On the cultivator's role
    1. Learn to identify competitors
    2. Isolate contaminated projects
    3. Dispose of contaminated projects properly
    4. Don't try to fight, it only makes it worse
  C. Keep your friends close...
    1. Healthy mycelium
      a. where and when to look for it
        i. all the time, hopefully
      b. [IMAGES] identification (mycelium_1-3)
      c. Know your target myc! (Laetiporus sulphureus image)
  D. ...and your enemies closer
    1. Mold and other Fungi
      a. where and when to look for it
        i. agar (especially Penicilium and Aspergillius spp)
        ii. grain jars
        iii. during fruiting
        iv. all stages - mold is everywhere, stay attentive!
      b. wispy, radial, changes from white to another color
      c. [IMAGES] (aspergillius_*)
    2. Bacteria & Yeast
      a. where and when to look for it
        i. agar
        ii. grain jars (wet spots)
        iii. fruiting (wet spots, discolorations)
      b. form individual colonies
      c. [IMAGES] identification (Brett, Bacillius)
    3. Viruses
      a. where and when to look for it
      b. you can only see the results on fruits
      c. not very common
  E. How to deal
    1. Rescue attempts
      a. Transfer myc to a new plate
      b. Cover the whole thing with hot agar
      c. Wait it out
    2. Make a few 'blanks' to identify weak spots in your process
    3. Be a Contamophobe (EGCM, pg 48)
IV. Sanitation
  A. 'Work Smarter, Not Harder'
    1. Sanitation is hard
    2. Find every trick you can to make it unnecessary
      a. Agar jars, for example
      b. minimize non-sterile contact
      c. develop stronger strains
  B. "Preparing the Landing Zone" - Sanitation
    1. Cleaning, Habit and Ritual - EGCM, pg 44
    2. The cultivator is best when s/he is simply a facilitator
      a. The mycelium knows what to do
      b. Setup the environment as best you can with minimal interference
V. Yin and Yang/Contamination and Sanitation
    1. Don't be too accepting, don't get too aggressive
    2. Strive to find a balance
    3. Stop there - it's possible and easy to go too far
VI. Unknown Unknowns - What we're not covering
  A. Liquid Cultures - more mushrooms faster
    1. Why didn't we cover this?
      a. agar is more versitile
      b. easier to see the results
      c. possible to clean
      d. better to learn the 'hard' way first
    2. Why you might want to research it yourself (RMyc, pg 241-242)
      a. cheap
      b. fast and efficient - one good LC can last many months
      c. no agar!
      d. increases myceliation AND innoculation rates (3D vs 2D expansion)
      e. reduces or eliminates the need for a still-air transfer space
  B. Agar Plates - more contact vs. more room to experiment
    1. Why didn't we cover this?
      a. more expensive
      b. more work and higher contamination rates (leading to even more work)
      c. more required equipment (still-air transfer space)
    2. Why you might want to research it yourself
      a. plates can be really great to use when you get the process
      b. easier to isolate strains
      c. street cred
  C. Gloveboxes - minimize contact
    1. Why didn't we cover this? 
      a. we're not using plates
      b. the agar jars approximate a sterile environment
    2. Why you might want to research it yourself
      b. many teks require a still-air transfer space
  D. Incubators
    1. Why didn't we cover this?
      a. not enough time
      b. easy to DIY, many plans available online
    2. Why you might want to research it yourself
      a. Speed up!
      b. Lower rates of contamination

WORKSHOP:

I. Simple Agar Recipes
  A. ../agar_recipes/malt-yeast-extract
  B. ../agar_recipes/potato-dextrose-yeast
II. Preparing and Pouring Agar in theory
  A. combine ingrediants and heat
  B. pour, cap, and cover lid with aluminium foil
III [ACTIVITY] Preparing and Pouring Agar in practice
II. Introduction to Spawn Jars
  A. What they are - explanation of the pieces
    i. the jar: big, ideally flat sides
    ii. the lid: SSIP & polyfil respiration hole
  B. Why we should use them
    i. a traveling mini-sterile zone
    ii. minimize loss by splitting up spawn
    iii. easy to innoculate
III. [ACTIVITY] Build Spawn Jars
