Lesson One

Required equipment:

  * Pressure Cooker
  * Drill(s)
  * Example Agar Jars

Goals for this lesson: 

  * Get to know each other!
  * Basic understanding of mushroom lifecycle
  * Decomposers vs Mychorrhizal Fungi
  * Define our focus: home-scale cultivation
  * 5 W's regarding home cultivation
  * Basic understanding of fungal needs and the cultivator's role
  * Safe PC usage
  * Basic understanding of filter jars and why we'll use them

I. Introduction
  A. Who am i?
  B. Who are you?
  C. Goals for this course
    1. Learn primary skills to build on
    2. Hands-on practice backed with theory
      a. understanding the 'why' allows you to innovate
    3. What can I do when this course is done?
      a. understand fungal needs
      b. clone mushroom tissue and grow it out
      c. have the resources and understanding to keep going
  D. Goals for this lesson
    1-8. see above
II. Mushroom Life Cycle
  A. [IMAGE] fungi life cycle - EGCM, pg 18
  B. Description of Basidiomycota life cycle (RMyc, pgs 9-10)
  C. Ecological Roles
    1. "The Role of Fungi as Decomposers" (RMyc, pg 38)
      a. Fungi provide 96% of the C02 needed by the world’s plants
      b. Much comes from wood, which only fungi can decompose
      c. Critical to the survival of habitats
        i. New elements cannot be created, they must be recycled
        ii. Fungi create soluble forms of nutrients that plants 
        would otherwise not be able to access
    2. "Benefits of the Mycorrhizal Relationship" (RMyc, pg 29)
      a. Expands the absorptive area of the plants roots 10-1000x
        i. Growth rate ++
        ii. Survival time of roots ++
        iii. Nutritional content ++
        iv. Medicinal quality ++
        v. Flowering rate ++
        vi. Time to reach maturity --
      b. Fungi produce digestive enzymes which unlock nutrients
III. 5W's of Home Cultivation
  A. Who can cultivate mushrooms at home?
    1. Anyone! 
    2. Invest various amounts of time, money and interest
  B. What is the goal here?  What can I learn?
    1. Home-scale cultivation (but that's still broad!)
    2. How to clone a mushroom (any mushroom - forest or market)
    3. Build up mycelium in a controlled environment
    4. Resources about where to learn more
  C. When can mushrooms be cultivated?
    1. Anytime!
    2. Seasonal changes can be used to focus on different species
  D. Where can mushrooms be cultivated?
    1. (almost) Anywhere!
      a. apartment
      b. office
      c. storage locker
      d. somewhere you will be often
      e. somewhere you can automate
      f. somewhere with basic facilities and stable temperature
  E. Why cultivate mushrooms?
    1. Food
      a. excellent source of protein for vegans (and everyone)
      b. food security - produce food locally
      c. circular economy - produce food from local waste streams
      d. permaculture - mushrooms are extremely multi-functional
    2. Medicine
      a. *Penicillium chyrsogenum*
      b. Anti-Cancer, Anti-AIDS, and more (MR, chapter 4)
      c. "Customized MycoMedicine" (RMyc, 184)
    3. Psychedelics
      a. probably a few here for this anyway...
      b. this is how home-scale cultivation got started
      c. the best horticulturists grow pot, the best mycologists...
    4. Research
      a. natural systems
      b. mycointernet!
    5. Mycorestoration - or "enhanced ecological roles"
      a. oil spills - *Pleurotus* spp
      b. Weapons caches vs *Flammulina velutipes* (Enoki) (MR, pg 99)
      c. Nerve Gas vs *Psilocybe* spp and luminescent mushrooms (MR, pg 98)
    6. Education and projects for kids
    7. Businesses and community projects
V. Fungal Needs and the Cultivator's Role
  A. "The 5 Fungal Needs" (RMyc, pg 203)
    1. Fungi need lots of good water, but not too much
    2. Fungi need a healthy diet
    3. Fungi need to breath
    4. Fungi need warmth
    5. Mushrooms need a proper fruiting surface
  B. Phases of Cultivation (RMyc, pgs 201-202)
    1. Preface: the toolbelt approach
      a. no right way
      b. each method offers new options
      c. find what works for you
      d. it's okay to nerd out and it's okay not to
      e. expect failure and learn from it (journal!)
      f. prioritize results
    2. Phase 1: Agar and Liquid Inoculum
      a. Starting point
        i. when there is tissue to clone or spores to germinate
      b. “The first step toward growing fruit bodies is to obtain a healthy and
      competitor-free culture of mycelium” (RMyc, pg 228)
      c. "Expanding the mass...is the primary goal" (EGCM, pg 18)
      d. Options
        i. spores, live mycelium, dry mushrooms
        ii. agar, liquid inoculum, cardboard
      e. Senescence and keeping it interesting (RMyc, pg 205)
    3. Phase 2: Grain Spawn
      a. Starting point
        i. agar: when surface is 80-90% colonized
        ii. liquid inoculum: when viable mycelium can be extracted (1-2 weeks)
      b. “Grains provide a cheap, nutrient dense substrate for mycelium to
      rapidly grow on” (Radical Mycology)
      c. Preparation
        i. Goldilocks zone (RMyc, pg 247)
        ii. Soak and then sterilize
      d. Options
        i. rye, wheat, millet, popcorn, birdseed
        ii. agar, liquid inoculum
        iii. to shake or not to shake?
    4. Phase 3: Preparing and Inoculating Fruiting Substrate
      a. Starting point
        i. When every kernel is covered by mycelium and no bare grain surface is visible
      b. "Learning to spot when grains are ready to move onto another substrate
      is critical for successful cultivation" (Radical Mycology)
      c. This topic is a whole course (or several) by itself
      d. Wood-lovers: sawdust, logs, paper, cardboard
      e. Compost-lovers: horse manure, cow manure, finished compost, bokashi
      compost, humanure
      f. Both: coffee, worm castings, straw, wheat bran
    5. Phase 4: Fruiting
      a. Starting point
        i. When the casing layer is evenly myceliated but not overlayed
        ii. When primordium begin to form
      b. This topics is another whole course by itself
      c. Pinning triggers
        i. Increase in humidity
        ii. Decrease in CO2/Increase in O2 (FAE)
        iii. Decrease in temperature
        iv. Increase in ambient light
    6. Putting it all together: The PF Tek
      a. simple method to reliably produce small amounts of mushrooms
      b. great for experimenting!
      c. we'll come back to this later in the course
      d. left as an exercise to become familiar with the process

WORKSHOP:

I. Safe PC Usage
  A. The basics - RTFM
    1. Keep it clean
    2. Check that everything is as it should be
    3. Use enough Water
    4. Don't open it early
    5. Don't use it if something isn't right
  B. Secondary concerns
    1. Don't Get Burnt
    2. Don't Get Cut
    3. Bend With Your Knees
II. Introduction to Agar Jars
  A. What they are - explanation of the pieces
    1. The Jar: short and wide
    2. The Lid: SSIP & polyfil respiration hole
  B. Why we should use them
    1. A Traveling Sterile Zone
    2. Benefits of Agar without High Contamination Rates
    3. Easy to Make, Easy to Use, Easy to Discard
III. [ACTIVITY] Build Agar Jars
